src/Resources/doc/index.rst, before:

Twig Components
===============

**EXPERIMENTAL** This component is currently experimental and is likely
to change, or even change drastically.

Twig components give you the power to bind an object to a template,
making it easier to render and re-use small template "units" - like an
"alert", markup for a modal, or a category sidebar:

Every component consists of (1) a class::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $type = 'success';
        public string $message;
    }

And (2) a corresponding template:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/alert.html.twig #}
    <div class="alert alert-{{ type }}">
        {{ message }}
    </div>

Done! Now render it wherever you want:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', { message: 'Hello Twig Components!' }) }}

Enjoy your new component!

.. figure:: https://github.com/symfony/ux-twig-component/blob/2.x/alert-example.png?raw=true
   :alt: Example of the AlertComponent

   Example of the AlertComponent

This brings the familiar "component" system from client-side frameworks
into Symfony. Combine this with `Live Components`_, to create
an interactive frontend with automatic, Ajax-powered rendering.

Want a demo? Check out https://github.com/weaverryan/live-demo.

Installation
------------

Let's get this thing installed! Run:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require symfony/ux-twig-component

That's it! We're ready to go!

Creating a Basic Component
--------------------------

Let's create a reusable "alert" element that we can use to show success
or error messages across our site. Step 1 is always to create a
component that has an ``AsTwigComponent`` class attribute. Let's start
as simple as possible::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
    }

**Note:** If this class is auto-configured, *and* you're using Symfony
5.3+, then you're all set. Otherwise, register the service and tag it
with ``twig.component`` and with a ``key`` tag attribute for the
component's name (``alert``).

Step 2 is to create a template for this component. By default, templates
live in ``templates/components/{Component Name}.html.twig``, where
``{Component Name}`` is whatever you passed as the first argument to the
``AsTwigComponent`` class attribute:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/alert.html.twig #}
    <div class="alert alert-success">
        Success! You've created a Twig component!
    </div>

This isn't very interesting yet… since the message is hardcoded into the
template. But it's enough! Celebrate by rendering your component from
any other Twig template:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert') }}

Done! You've just rendered your first Twig Component! Take a moment to
fist pump - then come back!

Passing Data into your Component
--------------------------------

Good start: but this isn't very interesting yet! To make our ``alert``
component reusable, we need to make the message and type
(e.g. ``success``, ``danger``, etc) configurable. To do that, create a
public property for each:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
      // ...

      #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
      class AlertComponent
      {
    +     public string $message;

    +     public string $type = 'success';

          // ...
      }

In the template, the ``AlertComponent`` instance is available via
the ``this`` variable and public properties are available directly.
Use them to render the two new properties:

.. code-block:: twig

    <div class="alert alert-{{ type }}">
        {{ message }}

        {# Same as above, but using "this", which is the component object #}
        {{ this.message }}
    </div>

How can we populate the ``message`` and ``type`` properties? By passing
them as a 2nd argument to the ``component()`` function when rendering:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', { message: 'Successfully created!' }) }}

    {{ component('alert', {
        type: 'danger',
        message: 'Danger Will Robinson!'
    }) }}

Behind the scenes, a new ``AlertComponent`` will be instantiated and the
``message`` key (and ``type`` if passed) will be set onto the
``$message`` property of the object. Then, the component is rendered! If
a property has a setter method (e.g. ``setMessage()``), that will be
called instead of setting the property directly.

Customize the Twig Template
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can customize the template used to render the template by passing it
as the second argument to the ``AsTwigComponent`` attribute:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
      // ...

    - #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    + #[AsTwigComponent('alert', 'my/custom/template.html.twig')]
      class AlertComponent
      {
          // ...
      }

**Note:** If this class is auto-configured, *and* you're using Symfony
5.3+, then you're all set. Otherwise, register the service and tag it
with ``twig.component`` and with a ``key`` tag attribute for the
component's name (``alert``) and a ``template`` tag attribute
(``my/custom/template.html.twig``).

The mount() Method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If, for some reason, you don't want an option to the ``component()``
function to be set directly onto a property, you can, instead, create a
``mount()`` method in your component::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    // ...

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $message;
        public string $type = 'success';

        public function mount(bool $isSuccess = true)
        {
            $this->type = $isSuccess ? 'success' : 'danger';
        }

        // ...
    }

The ``mount()`` method is called just one time immediately after your
component is instantiated. Because the method has an ``$isSuccess``
argument, we can pass an ``isSuccess`` option when rendering the
component:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', {
        isSuccess: false,
        message: 'Danger Will Robinson!'
    }) }}

If an option name matches an argument name in ``mount()``, the option is
passed as that argument and the component system will *not* try to set
it directly on a property.

PreMount Hook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to modify/validate data before it's *mounted* on the
component use a ``PreMount`` hook::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\PreMount;
    // ...

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $message;
        public string $type = 'success';

        #[PreMount]
        public function preMount(array $data): array
        {
            // validate data
            $resolver = new OptionsResolver();
            $resolver->setDefaults(['type' => 'success']);
            $resolver->setAllowedValues('type', ['success', 'danger']);
            $resolver->setRequired('message');
            $resolver->setAllowedTypes('message', 'string');

            return $resolver->resolve($data)
        }

        // ...
    }

.. note::

    If your component has multiple ``PreMount`` hooks, and you'd like to control
    the order in which they're called, use the ``priority`` attribute parameter:
    ``PreMount(priority: 10)`` (higher called earlier).

Fetching Services
-----------------

Let's create a more complex example: a "featured products" component.
You *could* choose to pass an array of Product objects into the
``component()`` function and set those on a ``$products`` property. But
instead, let's allow the component to do the work of executing the
query.

How? Components are *services*, which means autowiring works like
normal. This example assumes you have a ``Product`` Doctrine entity and
``ProductRepository``::

    // src/Components/FeaturedProductsComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use App\Repository\ProductRepository;
    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('featured_products')]
    class FeaturedProductsComponent
    {
        private ProductRepository $productRepository;

        public function __construct(ProductRepository $productRepository)
        {
            $this->productRepository = $productRepository;
        }

        public function getProducts(): array
        {
            // an example method that returns an array of Products
            return $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
        }
    }

In the template, the ``getProducts()`` method can be accessed via
``this.products``:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/featured_products.html.twig #}

    <div>
        <h3>Featured Products</h3>

        {% for product in this.products %}
            ...
        {% endfor %}
    </div>

And because this component doesn't have any public properties that we
need to populate, you can render it with:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('featured_products') }}

.. note::

    Because components are services, normal dependency injection can be used.
    However, each component service is registered with ``shared: false``. That
    means that you can safely render the same component multiple times with
    different data because each component will be an independent instance.

Computed Properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the previous example, instead of querying for the featured products
immediately (e.g. in ``__construct()``), we created a ``getProducts()``
method and called that from the template via ``this.products``.

This was done because, as a general rule, you should make your
components as *lazy* as possible and store only the information you need
on its properties (this also helps if you convert your component to a
`live component`_ later). With this setup, the query is only executed if and
when the ``getProducts()`` method is actually called. This is very similar
to the idea of "computed properties" in frameworks like `Vue`_.

But there's no magic with the ``getProducts()`` method: if you call
``this.products`` multiple times in your template, the query would be
executed multiple times.

To make your ``getProducts()`` method act like a true computed property
(where its value is only evaluated the first time you call the method),
you can store its result on a private property:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/FeaturedProductsComponent.php
      namespace App\Components;
      // ...

      #[AsTwigComponent('featured_products')]
      class FeaturedProductsComponent
      {
          private ProductRepository $productRepository;

    +     private ?array $products = null;

          // ...

          public function getProducts(): array
          {
    +         if ($this->products === null) {
    +             $this->products = $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
    +         }

    -         return $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
    +         return $this->products;
          }
      }

Embedded Components
-------------------

It's totally possible to embed one component into another. When you do
this, there's nothing special to know: both components render
independently. If you're using `Live Components`_, then there
*are* some guidelines related to how the re-rendering of parent and
child components works. Read `Live Embedded Components`_.

Contributing
------------

Interested in contributing? Visit the main source for this repository:
https://github.com/symfony/ux/tree/main/src/TwigComponent.

Backward Compatibility promise
------------------------------

This bundle aims at following the same Backward Compatibility promise as
the Symfony framework:
https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html

However it is currently considered `experimental`_,
meaning it is not bound to Symfony's BC policy for the moment.

.. _`Live Components`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html
.. _`live component`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html
.. _`Vue`: https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/computed.html
.. _`Live Embedded Components`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html#embedded-components
.. _`experimental`: https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/experimental.html

Commit message:

[TwigComponent][LiveComponent] clarify excluding this for public props

src/Resources/doc/index.rst, after:

Twig Components
===============

**EXPERIMENTAL** This component is currently experimental and is likely
to change, or even change drastically.

Twig components give you the power to bind an object to a template,
making it easier to render and re-use small template "units" - like an
"alert", markup for a modal, or a category sidebar:

Every component consists of (1) a class::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $type = 'success';
        public string $message;
    }

And (2) a corresponding template:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/alert.html.twig #}
    <div class="alert alert-{{ type }}">
        {{ message }}
    </div>

Done! Now render it wherever you want:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', { message: 'Hello Twig Components!' }) }}

Enjoy your new component!

.. figure:: https://github.com/symfony/ux-twig-component/blob/2.x/alert-example.png?raw=true
   :alt: Example of the AlertComponent

   Example of the AlertComponent

This brings the familiar "component" system from client-side frameworks
into Symfony. Combine this with `Live Components`_, to create
an interactive frontend with automatic, Ajax-powered rendering.

Want a demo? Check out https://github.com/weaverryan/live-demo.

Installation
------------

Let's get this thing installed! Run:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require symfony/ux-twig-component

That's it! We're ready to go!

Creating a Basic Component
--------------------------

Let's create a reusable "alert" element that we can use to show success
or error messages across our site. Step 1 is always to create a
component that has an ``AsTwigComponent`` class attribute. Let's start
as simple as possible::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
    }

**Note:** If this class is auto-configured, *and* you're using Symfony
5.3+, then you're all set. Otherwise, register the service and tag it
with ``twig.component`` and with a ``key`` tag attribute for the
component's name (``alert``).

Step 2 is to create a template for this component. By default, templates
live in ``templates/components/{Component Name}.html.twig``, where
``{Component Name}`` is whatever you passed as the first argument to the
``AsTwigComponent`` class attribute:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/alert.html.twig #}
    <div class="alert alert-success">
        Success! You've created a Twig component!
    </div>

This isn't very interesting yet… since the message is hardcoded into the
template. But it's enough! Celebrate by rendering your component from
any other Twig template:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert') }}

Done! You've just rendered your first Twig Component! Take a moment to
fist pump - then come back!

Passing Data into your Component
--------------------------------

Good start: but this isn't very interesting yet! To make our ``alert``
component reusable, we need to make the message and type
(e.g. ``success``, ``danger``, etc) configurable. To do that, create a
public property for each:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
      // ...

      #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
      class AlertComponent
      {
    +     public string $message;

    +     public string $type = 'success';

          // ...
      }

In the template, the ``AlertComponent`` instance is available via
the ``this`` variable and public properties are available directly.
Use them to render the two new properties:

.. versionadded:: 2.1

    The ability to reference local variables in the template (e.g. ``message``) was added in TwigComponents 2.1.
    Previously, all data needed to be referenced through ``this`` (e.g. ``this.message``).

.. code-block:: twig

    <div class="alert alert-{{ type }}">
        {{ message }}

        {# Same as above, but using "this", which is the component object #}
        {{ this.message }}
    </div>

How can we populate the ``message`` and ``type`` properties? By passing
them as a 2nd argument to the ``component()`` function when rendering:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', { message: 'Successfully created!' }) }}

    {{ component('alert', {
        type: 'danger',
        message: 'Danger Will Robinson!'
    }) }}

Behind the scenes, a new ``AlertComponent`` will be instantiated and the
``message`` key (and ``type`` if passed) will be set onto the
``$message`` property of the object. Then, the component is rendered! If
a property has a setter method (e.g. ``setMessage()``), that will be
called instead of setting the property directly.

Customize the Twig Template
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can customize the template used to render the template by passing it
as the second argument to the ``AsTwigComponent`` attribute:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
      // ...

    - #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    + #[AsTwigComponent('alert', 'my/custom/template.html.twig')]
      class AlertComponent
      {
          // ...
      }

**Note:** If this class is auto-configured, *and* you're using Symfony
5.3+, then you're all set. Otherwise, register the service and tag it
with ``twig.component`` and with a ``key`` tag attribute for the
component's name (``alert``) and a ``template`` tag attribute
(``my/custom/template.html.twig``).

The mount() Method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If, for some reason, you don't want an option to the ``component()``
function to be set directly onto a property, you can, instead, create a
``mount()`` method in your component::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php
    // ...

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $message;
        public string $type = 'success';

        public function mount(bool $isSuccess = true)
        {
            $this->type = $isSuccess ? 'success' : 'danger';
        }

        // ...
    }

The ``mount()`` method is called just one time immediately after your
component is instantiated. Because the method has an ``$isSuccess``
argument, we can pass an ``isSuccess`` option when rendering the
component:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('alert', {
        isSuccess: false,
        message: 'Danger Will Robinson!'
    }) }}

If an option name matches an argument name in ``mount()``, the option is
passed as that argument and the component system will *not* try to set
it directly on a property.

PreMount Hook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to modify/validate data before it's *mounted* on the
component use a ``PreMount`` hook::

    // src/Components/AlertComponent.php

    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\PreMount;
    // ...

    #[AsTwigComponent('alert')]
    class AlertComponent
    {
        public string $message;
        public string $type = 'success';

        #[PreMount]
        public function preMount(array $data): array
        {
            // validate data
            $resolver = new OptionsResolver();
            $resolver->setDefaults(['type' => 'success']);
            $resolver->setAllowedValues('type', ['success', 'danger']);
            $resolver->setRequired('message');
            $resolver->setAllowedTypes('message', 'string');

            return $resolver->resolve($data)
        }

        // ...
    }

.. note::

    If your component has multiple ``PreMount`` hooks, and you'd like to control
    the order in which they're called, use the ``priority`` attribute parameter:
    ``PreMount(priority: 10)`` (higher called earlier).

Fetching Services
-----------------

Let's create a more complex example: a "featured products" component.
You *could* choose to pass an array of Product objects into the
``component()`` function and set those on a ``$products`` property. But
instead, let's allow the component to do the work of executing the
query.

How? Components are *services*, which means autowiring works like
normal. This example assumes you have a ``Product`` Doctrine entity and
``ProductRepository``::

    // src/Components/FeaturedProductsComponent.php
    namespace App\Components;

    use App\Repository\ProductRepository;
    use Symfony\UX\TwigComponent\Attribute\AsTwigComponent;

    #[AsTwigComponent('featured_products')]
    class FeaturedProductsComponent
    {
        private ProductRepository $productRepository;

        public function __construct(ProductRepository $productRepository)
        {
            $this->productRepository = $productRepository;
        }

        public function getProducts(): array
        {
            // an example method that returns an array of Products
            return $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
        }
    }

In the template, the ``getProducts()`` method can be accessed via
``this.products``:

.. code-block:: twig

    {# templates/components/featured_products.html.twig #}

    <div>
        <h3>Featured Products</h3>

        {% for product in this.products %}
            ...
        {% endfor %}
    </div>

And because this component doesn't have any public properties that we
need to populate, you can render it with:

.. code-block:: twig

    {{ component('featured_products') }}

.. note::

    Because components are services, normal dependency injection can be used.
    However, each component service is registered with ``shared: false``. That
    means that you can safely render the same component multiple times with
    different data because each component will be an independent instance.

Computed Properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the previous example, instead of querying for the featured products
immediately (e.g. in ``__construct()``), we created a ``getProducts()``
method and called that from the template via ``this.products``.

This was done because, as a general rule, you should make your
components as *lazy* as possible and store only the information you need
on its properties (this also helps if you convert your component to a
`live component`_ later). With this setup, the query is only executed if and
when the ``getProducts()`` method is actually called. This is very similar
to the idea of "computed properties" in frameworks like `Vue`_.

But there's no magic with the ``getProducts()`` method: if you call
``this.products`` multiple times in your template, the query would be
executed multiple times.

To make your ``getProducts()`` method act like a true computed property
(where its value is only evaluated the first time you call the method),
you can store its result on a private property:

.. code-block:: diff

      // src/Components/FeaturedProductsComponent.php
      namespace App\Components;
      // ...

      #[AsTwigComponent('featured_products')]
      class FeaturedProductsComponent
      {
          private ProductRepository $productRepository;

    +     private ?array $products = null;

          // ...

          public function getProducts(): array
          {
    +         if ($this->products === null) {
    +             $this->products = $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
    +         }

    -         return $this->productRepository->findFeatured();
    +         return $this->products;
          }
      }

Embedded Components
-------------------

It's totally possible to embed one component into another. When you do
this, there's nothing special to know: both components render
independently. If you're using `Live Components`_, then there
*are* some guidelines related to how the re-rendering of parent and
child components works. Read `Live Embedded Components`_.

Contributing
------------

Interested in contributing? Visit the main source for this repository:
https://github.com/symfony/ux/tree/main/src/TwigComponent.

Backward Compatibility promise
------------------------------

This bundle aims at following the same Backward Compatibility promise as
the Symfony framework:
https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html

However it is currently considered `experimental`_,
meaning it is not bound to Symfony's BC policy for the moment.

.. _`Live Components`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html
.. _`live component`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html
.. _`Vue`: https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/computed.html
.. _`Live Embedded Components`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html#embedded-components
.. _`experimental`: https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/experimental.html
